this is to present the most crucial details to my knowledge about the main idol.

the next parts of the series, will address the legends, rituals and and metaphysical concepts. 
sectarian views maybe presented and due to the nature of the topic, unavoidable. sanctum temperature is also addressed next.

SHOULDERS
the shoulders are broad , with prominent deltoids. there are hanging shoulder ornamentations extending from the base of the neck 
all the way to the end of the deltoids . they are very beautiful .

in most rock-cut idols, these ornaments extend like a horizontal beam and connect the main body to the uplifted arms 
( to give support and avoid breakage). the Moola Virat here doesn't have such support beams . the arms are held aloft, and suspended in the air.

no horizontal support beam - this is also a good point for detecting fake pictures of the moolavirat.

UPPER LIMBS
there are 4 limbs , 2 anterior and 2 posterior. many people who claim to be experts on him don't even know this .
 I have seen lectures by PhDs who falsely proclaimed that there are no posterior arms.

HE HAS ONLY 2 ARMS - FALSE INFORMATION. HE CLEARLY HAS 4 ARMS.

even most of the wooden and decorative pieces we see for sale, craft the idol with 2 arms, and suspend the shanka-chakra.
 they are only adding to the wrong conclusions people have.

POSTERIOR LIMBS

they are upheld, aloft and mighty. they look very strong and even more imposing when viewed from the backside
 ( like a bodybuilder giving a back-double bicep pose. this is because of the height , the slim waist and the relatively heavy arms )

the fists are curled as if he is holding weapons. ( again discussed separately). the ornaments on the limbs are -

armlets

armlets on the biceps area - called KEYURA . in paintings we see snake armlets, in gold. thats man-made. 
the real idol has 5 pointed pillar like structures, ( PANCHA-SIKHA) coming out of the armlet , upwards. like 5 fingers.
 ( this is representative of the PanchaAgni concept found in the Rig Veda ). somehow a gold one in this shape was never donated. 
 also, it does not look as big and prominent as the snake armlets. this is another reason for the shiva - shakti - skanda debate.

Forearmlets

called KATAKA. they are just below the elbows. shaped like bangles, but high up near the elbow area.

WRISTlets

there are 3 series of wristlets. One is very broad and thick, called the Kadiya or kankana , seen in purusha devatas.
 they are very beautifully decorate and quite exquisite.

THE SHANKA-CHAKRA

the posterior-limbs are curled into fists as if holding the weapons. however, it seems they were absent. 
currently they are there. why they weren't there, and why they got here is discussed later in this post and future ones

the Sudarshana Chakra is seen with 8,16 and 32 petals coming out of the center.

there are 108 beads in the peripheral ring.

the chakra has 4 flaming locks coming out on all 4 cardinal sides.

each flame actually has 7 tongues of fire (SAPTVA-JIVHA AGNI )

the Panchajanya Conch is seen in the left arm. it is a right-curl (dakshinavarta ) conch.
 it also has similar flames projecting on all sides

the material for the weapons was either gold or Panchaloha. we cannot be sure.

later, a coat of solid gold was put upon them and extended beyond them to include the wrists also . 
this was to ensure permanent fixation.

this is the central point of endless rumors , as their presence in the sculpture would end the discussion.

now, they are installed , made out of Panchaloha , and coated with a gold glove on them. the glove cannot be removed, 
as it was a molten cast to be a permanent fix. so , today the weapons are unremovable ,
 without causing massive damage to the idol. ( for all those who have such weird ideas )

I AM DEVIATING HERE FROM THE DESCRIPTION TO COMMENT UPON THE WEAPONS.

caution: what you read below will be baised towards one school. this is going into territory of legends and unsusbtantiated hearsay;

one of the famous legends is that the lord had weapons, and then gave them away to his Devotee, the king TONDAIMAAN. 
there is some historical truth to this. I leave it to the reader to come to conclusions.

it is now known that there was a historical Chola king called TONDAIMAAN. thats not his real name.
 TONDAI - MANDALAM is the word signifying his territory in ancient Tamil.

ancient Tamil accounts of the idol, as well as the altars, all explicitly state that he is holding a blazing chakra under the sunlight,
 and also a white Shanka which would shine at night under the moon.

when the initial temple was built, it was a wooden shack. what we are seeing now, is the 4th version of the temple. 
it is rumored to have been in disrepair multiple times over the centuries.

by the 9th century, the temple was very small in size , in dense forests.

people went up in groups to worship, cook and stay. usually a military guard for the group. afterwards they would again come down to the plains . 
there were 4 proxy temples in the plains set up between 6th and 9th centuries , serving as alternatives. it was very dangerous in those days to go up the hills.

the proxy temples are another vital part to the story . I will address them in a future post.

there are stone markings in Kala hasti (a famous shiva temple, located in the plains some distance away ) about the tirumala temple.

particularly these inscriptions state that land was allowed as endowment for daily deepam and basic puja on the hill ,
 but few years later upon inspection, it was found that no one was going up the hill daily. ( yes Vaikhanasa arcakas were skipping - I have to admit )

these inscriptions also state penalties upon them and seizure of the lands as well. 
( these are not too public ,out of shame. the reader can refer to tirumala rock inscriptions published by TTD for this)

some of the the priests say, in private discussions that , the shanka-chakra, as well the precious silver idol gifted ( another post) , 
and some ornaments were taken in groups when celebrating festivals, duly installed on the main idol, proper puja conducted, and once the festival was done, 
they would again remove the costly gold and silver items (including the gold chakra and gold-framed shanka ) under armed guards. 
they were then deposited with the local king for safety, as their security could not be guaranteed on the lonely small shrine in the hills.

so it was common practice to install the shanka-chakra during pubic worship and then remove them and lock up the temple. 
the ornaments are of course given to the King or Local ruler as he would be the official custodian.

I think the reader should by now understand how the legends tie into this fact that the gold weapons 
were routinely in the custody of the king. there is now now way to prove this as a concrete fact. but I do think this is very plausible.

continued in next part. PART-7 IS HERE